# Verse 1

ब्रह्मरन्ध्र-सरसीरुहोदरे नित्यलग्नमवदातमद्भुतं ।\
कुण्डलिविवरकाण्डमण्डितं द्वादशार्णसरसीरुहं भजे ॥ १ ॥

brahmarandhra-sarasīruhodare nityalagnamavadātamadbhutaṃ |\
kuṇḍalivivarakāṇḍamaṇḍitaṃ dvādaśārṇasarasīruhaṃ bhaje || 1 ||

I adore the wonderful white lotus of twelve letters[^1] which is within the womb
(_udare_) of, and inseparable from, the pericarp of the lotus in which is the
Brahma-randhra, and which is adorned by the channel of Kuṇḍalī.[^2]

## Commentary by Śrī-Kālīcaraṇa

The hymn _Pādukā-pañcaka_, composed by Him of Five Faces,[^3] destroys all
demerit.[^4] Kālīcaraṇa by his Ṭīkā called Amalā (stainless) makes patent its
beauty.

Sadāśiva, the Liberator of the three worlds, being desirous of speaking of
_gurudhyāna-yoga_[^5] in the form of a hymn (_stotra_), first of all describes
the place of the Guru.

The verb _bhaje_ is first person singular, _ātmanepada_, emphasizing that Śiva
Himself adores or worships. He says, “I do adore or worship.” By saying so He
expresses the necessity that all worshippers (_upāsaka_-s) of the mantras
revealed by Him should adore this wonderful twelvepetalled lotus. He thus shows
the necessity of His worship.

The meaning of this verse in brief is this: I adore the twelve-petalled Lotus
which is within the pericarp of the _sahasrāra_.

“Wonderful” (_adbhuta_). It excites our wonder by reason of its being pervaded
by the lustre (_tejas_) of Brahman, and for other reasons.

“Lotus of twelve letters” (_dvādaśārṇa-sarasīruha_)—i.e., the totus which
contains twelve letters. The twelve letters, according to those learned in the
Tantras, are the twelve letters which make the _gurumantra_; they are Sa, Ha,
Kha, Phreṃ, Ha, Sa, Kṣa, Ma, La, Va, Ra, Yūṃ. Some say that by _dvādaśārṇa_ is
meant the twelfth vowel, which is the _vāg-bhava-bīja_.[^6] But that cannot be.
If it were so, the authority quoted below would be tautologous: “(Meditate on)
your Guru who is Śiva as being on the lustrous (_hamsapīṭha_, the substance of
which is _mantra—mantra-maya_), which is in the pericarp of the lotus of twelve
letters, near the region of the Moon[^7] in the pericarp, and which is adorned
by the letters Ha, La, and Kṣa, which are within the triangle A-Ka-Tha. The
lotus of twelve letters is in the pericarp (of the _sahasrāra_).”

The above passage speaks of the _mantramaya-pīṭha_. The mantra substance of this
_pīṭha_ is the _guru-mantra_ in the form of _vāg-bhava-bīja_.[^8] There would
therefore be a repetition of the same mantra.[^9] “_dvādaśārṇa_” is made up by
_bahuvrīhi-samāsa_—that in which there are _dvādaśa_ (twelve) _arṇa_-s
(letters). This lotus has therefore twelve petals, on which are the twelve
letters.

It is true that the letters are not here specified, and there has been nothing
said as to where they are placed; but the “Guru-Gītā” says[^10] that “the
letters Haṃ and Sa surround (that is, as petals) the lotus,” wherein the Guru
should be meditated. This leads us to the conclusion that the letters Haṃ and
Saḥ are repeated six times, thus making twelve, and so the number of petals
becomes clearly twelve, as each petal contains one letter. This is a fit subject
of consideration for the wise.

“Inseparable from” (_nitya-lagna_ or _lagnaṃ_).—That is, it is connected with
the Sahasrāra in such a way that the one cannot be thought of without thinking
of the other.

“Which is within the womb of and inseparable from the pericarp of the lotus in
which is the Brahmarandhra” (_brahmarandhra-sarasīruhodara_).—That is, the
Sahasrāra, the thousand-petalled lotus in which is the _brahmarandhra_; within
its womb, that is to say, within it (_tanmadhye_), that is, within its pericarp
(_tat-karṇikāyāṃ_).

The Kaṅkāla-Mālinī, in describing the lotus of a thousand petals, thus speaks of
the place of the _brahma-randhra_: “In its (Sahasrāra) pericarp, O Deveśī, is
Antarātmā, and above it is the Guru; above him is the Surya Maṇḍala and Candra
Maṇḍala and Mahā-vāyu, and above it is Brahma-randhra.”

Some say that by _udara_ (belly or interior) is meant within the triangle in the
pericarp. That is not right. The word _udara_ here means “interior” or “centre”.
The interior of the lotus contains its pericarp but the text does not mean the
interior of the triangle in the pericarp, because the triangle is not here
mentioned. The Śyāmā-saparyā quotes the following explicitly:

“The Lotus of twelve petals (or letters) is within the pericarp of the white
lotus of a thousand petals, which has its head turned downward, and the
filaments of which are of the colour of the rising sun, and which is adorned by
all the letters of the alphabet.” Here the statement ‘within the pericarp’ is
explicit.

“Adorned by the channel of Kuṇḍalī” (_kuṇḍalī-vivara-kāṇḍa-maṇḍitaṃ_). The
_vivara_ (channel) is that by which Kuṇḍalinī goes to Śiva in the Sahasrāra. The
Citriṇī contains within it this passage or channel. Citriṇī is the tube (stalk),
as it were, through which the passage runs, and Citriṇī adorns and is adorned by
this lotus. As a lotus rests on its stalk, so does the twelve-petalled lotus
rest on Citriṇī and is made beautiful by its stalk.

### Footnotes and references

[^1]: _Dvādaśārṇa_—that is, twelve petals. The petals of the lotus are not
independent of the letters thereon.

[^2]: That is, the Citriṇī-Nādī. The lotus rests on the upper end of Citriṇī.

[^3]: Śiva. See as to the five faces the citation from the Liṅgārcana Tantra,
v.7, post. There is also a concealed sixth face, “like the colour caused by
deadly poison,” known as Nīlakaṇṭha.

[^4]: _Aghas_—sin and sorrow, pain and penalty.

[^5]: _Yoga_ with the Supreme known as the Guru.

[^6]: i.e., _bīja_ of Sarasvatī—Aiṃ.

[^7]: _Candra-maṇḍala_, by the Commentator (reading the locative as _sāmīpye
saptamī_, i.e., locative case indicative of proximity).

[^8]: Aiṃ.

[^9]: That is, if we understand that the body of both the _pīṭha_ and the petals
is Aiṃ. The _vāgbhava-bīja_ Aim is the _guru-bīja_ also.

[^10]: This verse is quoted in full under v.6, post.
