तत्पुटे पटुतडित्कडारिमस्पर्धमानमणिपाटलप्रभं |\
चिन्तयामि हृदि चिन्मयं वपुर्नादबिन्दुमणिपीठमण्डलं ॥ ३ ॥

tatpuṭe paṭutaḍitkaḍārimaspardhamānamaṇipāṭalaprabhaṃ |\
cintayāmi hṛdi cinmayaṃ vapurnādabindumaṇipīṭhamaṇḍalaṃ || 3 ||

In my heart I meditate on the jewelled altar (_maṇipīṭha_), and on _nāda_ and
_bindu_ as within the triangle afore-spoken. The pale red[^1] glory of the gems
in this altar shames the brilliance of the lightning flash. Its substance is
_cit_.

## Commentary by Śrī-Kālīcaraṇa

The place of the Guru is on the jewelled altar within the triangle. He therefore
describes the jewelled altar (_maṇipīṭha_).

“In my heart” (_hṛdi_), in my Mind (_manasi_).

“On the jewelled altar and on _nāda_ and _bindu_”
(_nāda-bindu-manipīṭha-maṇḍalaṃ_ ). The compound word may be formed in two ways:
_maṇipīṭha-maṇḍalaṃ_ along with _nāda_ and _bindu_ (_nāda-bindu-bhyam saha), or
_nāda_ and _bindu_ and _maṇi-pīṭha-maṇḍalaṃ_—i.e., all these three. Some
interpret this to mean that the _maṇḍala maṇipīṭha_ is composed of _nāda_ and
_bindu_. But that cannot be. _Nāda_ is white, and _bindu_ is red; and the pale
red glory whereby the _maṇi-pīṭha_ shames the lustre of the lightning flash is
neither red nor white.

The Śāradā-Tilaka says: “This _bindu_ is Śiva and Śakti,[^2] and divides itself
into three different parts; its divisions are called _bindu_, _nāda_, and
_bīja_.” If this be interpreted to mean, as it ought to be, that _bindu_ is
Para-Śakti-maya, and _bīja_, _nāda_, and _bindu_, are respectively Fire, Moon
and Sun, then _nāda_ being the Moon is white, and _bindu_ being the Sun is red.
Pūrṇānanda also speaks[^3] of _nāda_ as being white like Baladeva etc.

The Bṛhat-Śrī-krama also says: “There was the imperishable _bindu_, lustrous
(red) like the young Sun.”

Now, as one is white and the other red, they can never be the pale red gem. The
meaning given by us is therefore correct. The solution is that _nāda_ is below,
and _bindu_ above, and _maṇi-pīṭha_ in between the two—thus should one meditate.
This has been clearly shown in the _Guru-dhyāna_ in Kaṅkāla-mālinī-Tantra:
“Meditate on the excellent Antarātma[^4] in the (region of the) lotus of a
thousand petals, and above it (Antarātmā) meditate on the resplendent throne[^5]
between _nāda_ and _bindu_, and on this throne (meditate) upon the eternal Guru,
white like a mountain of silver.”

“The pale red glory of the gems in this altar shames the brilliance of
lightning” (_paṭu-taḍit-kaḍārima-sparddhamāna-maṇi-pāṭala-prabhaṃ_). This
qualifies _maṇi-pīṭha-maṇḍalaṃ_. To be “_paṭu_” is to be able to fully do one’s
work. Now, lightning wants to display itself. Here the idea is that the pale red
lustre of the gems in the _pīṭha_ shames the uninterrupted brilliance of the
reddish-yellow (_piṅgala_) lightning flasḥ. It is of a pale red colour inasmuch
as the _maṇi-pīṭha_ is covered all over with gems.

“Its substance is Cit” (_cinmayaṃ vapuḥ_). The _cinmaya_ or _jñāna-maya_ body.
The body of _nāda_, _bindu_ and _maṇi-pīṭha_ is _cinmaya_ or _jñāna-maya_.[^6]
Others interpret it to mean “I meditate on the _cinmaya_ body of the twelfth
vowel,[^7] the _bīja_ of Sarasvatī, which is the _gurumantra_.” But that is
wrong. The Guru is white, and his _bīja_ is also white; to attribute to it a
pale red lustre would be incongruous.

### Footnotes and references

[^1]: Pāṭala.

[^2]: Para-Śakti-maya=Śiva-Śakti-maya.

[^3]: V.35, Ṣaṭcakra-nirūpaṇa, ante.

[^4]: This Antarātmā is Haṃsa. Unless the words in the text, “in the lotus of a
thousand petals,” be read _sāmīpye saptamī_, the view here expressed differs
from that adopted by Kālīcaraṇa, that Haṃsa is in the twelve-petalled lotus.

[^5]: Siṃhāsana—lit., lion seat, the seat of the honoured one, the King’s seat.

[^6]: That is, their substance is pure Cit not in association with Māyā.

[^7]: The _bīja_ of Sarasvatī or _vāgbhava-bīja_ is Aiṃ. Ai is the twelfth
vowel.
