# Verse 2

तस्य कन्दलितकर्णिकापुटे कॢप्तरेखमकथादिरेखया ।\
कोणलक्षितहलक्षमण्डलिभावलक्ष्यमबलालयं भजे ॥ २ ॥

tasya kandalitakarṇikāpuṭe kḷptarekhamakathādirekhayā |\
koṇalakṣitahalakṣamaṇḍalibhāvalakṣyamabalālayaṃ bhaje || 2 ||

I adore the abode of Śakti in the place where the two pericarps come together.
It is formed by the lines[^1] A, Ka, and Tha; and the letters Ha, La, and Kṣa,
which are visible in each of its corners, give it the character of a Maṇḍala.[^2]

## Commentary by Śrī-Kālīcaraṇa

The Guru should be meditated upon as in the triangle A-Ka-Tha within the
pericarp of the lotus before-mentioned. He now wishes to describe the triangle
so that an adequate conception of it may be formed.

“The abode of Śakti” (_abalālayaṃ_). By _abalā_ is meant Śakti. Here She is
Kāma-kalā triangular in form, and the three _śakti_-s, Vāmā, Jyeṣṭā, and Raudrī,
are lines of the triangle. These three lines or _śakti_-s emanate from the three
_bindu_-s.[^3] Kāma-kalā is the abode of Śakti.

The Yāmala speaks of the identity of Kāma-kalā with this abode. The passage
begins, “I now speak of Kāma-kalā,” and proceeding says:[^4] “She is the three
_bindu_-s. She is the three _śakti_-s. She is the threefold manifestation. She
is everlasting. That is, Kāma-kalā is composed of the three _śakti_-s spoken of
(_triśakti-rūpā_). He next speaks of the attributes of Abalālaya (abode of
Śakti).

“The place where the two pericarps come together” (_kandalita-karṇikāpuṭe_).
_Kaṇḍala_ ordinarily means a quarrel in which one attacks the other with words.
Here its significance is merely that the pericarp of one (the twelve-petalled
lotus) is included within that of the other (Sahasrāra).

Place (_puṭa_), i.e., the place where the triangle is “formed by the lines A,
Ka, and Tha” (_kḷpta-rekhaṃ a-ka-thādi-rekhayā_). The sixteen vowels beginning
with A form the line Vāmā, the sixteen letters beginning with Ka form the line
Jyeṣṭā, and the sixteen letters beginning with Tha form the line Raudrī. The
abode of Śakti is formed by these three lines.

The Bṛhat Śrī-krama, in dealing with Kāma-kalā, says: “From the Bindu as the
sprouting root (Aṅkura) She has assumed the form of letters.”[^5]

“The letters Ha, La, and Kṣa, which are visible in its corners, give it the
character of a Maṇḍala” (_koṇa-lakṣita-hala-kṣa-maṇḍalī-bhāva-lakṣyaṃ_). In its
corners—i.e., in the inner corners of the aforesaid triangle. The three corners
of the triangle are at the apex,[^6] the right and the left. The letters Ha, La,
and Kṣa, which are visible there, give the place the character of a Maṇḍala.

One cannot form an adequate conception (_dhyāna_) of this triangle without
knowing it in all its particulars, and that is why other authorities are quoted.
This triangle should be so drawn that if one were to walk round it would always
be on one’s left.

The Śāktānanda-taraṅgiṇī says: “Write the triangle A-Ka-Tha so that walking
outside it is always on one’s left.[^7]

Kālī Ūrdhvāmnāya: “The Tri-bindu[^8] is the Supreme Tattva, and embodies within
itself Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva (_brahmaviṣṇu-śivātmakam_). The triangle composed
of the letters has emanated from the Bindu.” Also: “The letters A to Visarga
make the line Brahmā which is the line of Prajāpati; the letters Ka to Ta make
the most supreme (Parātparā) line of Viṣṇu. The letters Tha to Sa make the line
of Śiva. The three lines emanate from the three Bindus.”

Tantra-jīvana: “The lines Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas, surround the Yoni-Maṇḍala.”
Also: “Above is the line of Sattva; the line of Rajas is on the left, and the
line of Tamas is on one’s right.”[^9]

By a careful consideration of the above authorities, the conclusion is
irresistible that the letters A-Ka-Tha go in the direction abovementioned.

The Svatantra-Tantra says: “The lines A-Ka-Tha surround the letters Ha, La and
Kṣa.” It therefore places the letters Ha, La, Kṣa within the triangle.

It is needless to discuss the matter at greater length.

### Footnotes and references

[^1]: _a-ka-thādi_—i.e., the lines formed by the letters A to Ah, Ka to Ta and
Tha to Sa. These letters placed as three lines form the three sides of the
triangle.

[^2]: i.e., the diagram where the Divinity is summoned and worshipped.

[^3]: _bindu-trayāṅkurabhūtā_—that is, they have the three _bindu_-s as their
sprouting shoot. (See _Kāmakalāvilāsa_.)

[^4]: _tribinduḥ sā trimūrtiḥ sā triśaktiḥ sā sanātanī_.

[^5]: _Varṇāvayava-rūpiṇī_. Bindu appears in the form of letters by germinating
as a sprout. The letters are sprouts from _bindu_: that is, the Universe is
evolved from _bindu_.

[^6]: The triangle, it should be remembered, has its apex downward.

[^7]: _vāmāvartena vilikhet_. The drawing is made in the direction which, is the
reverse to that of the hands of a watch.

[^8]: i.e., the three _bindu_-s considered as one and also separately.

[^9]: That is, on the left and right of the Yoni or the right and left of the
spectator.
