# Verse 7

पादुकापञ्चकस्तोत्रं पञ्चवक्त्राद्विनिर्गतं ।\
षडाम्नायफलप्राप्तं प्रपञ्चे चातिदुर्लभं ॥ ७ ॥

pādukāpañcakastotraṃ pañcavaktrādvinirgataṃ |\
ṣaḍāmnāyaphalaprāptaṃ prapañce cātidurlabhaṃ || 7 ||

This hymn of praise of the fivefold footstool was uttered by Him of Five Faces.
By (the recitation and hearing of) it is attained that good which is gained by
(the recitation and hearing of) all the hymns in praise of Śiva. Such fruit is
only attainable by great labour in the wandering (_saṃsāra_).

## Commentary by Śrī-Kālīcaraṇa

He now speaks of the good gained by reciting and listening to this _stotra_.

“Hymn of praise of the fivefold footstool” (_pādukā-pañcakastotra_). _Pādukā_
means a footstool (_pada-rakṣaṇādhāra_). The five of these are: (1) The
(twelve-petalled) lotus; (2) the triangle A-Ka-Tha in its pericarp (3) the
region of the Nāda, Bindu, and Maṇi-pīṭha in it; (4) the Haṃsa below; and (5)
the triangle on the Maṇi-pīṭha. Or they may be counted thus: (1) The lotus
(i.e., twelve-petalled); (2) the triangle (A-Ka-Tha); (3) Nāda-Bindu; (4) the
Maṇi-pīṭha _maṇḍala_; (5) the Haṃsa—which is above it and taken collectively
form the triangular Kāma-kalā.[^1]

_Stotra_ is a hymn of praise. This hymn, including the verse which speaks of the
benefit to be gained by listening to it, is one of seven verses.

“Uttered by Him of Five Faces” (_pañca-vaktrād vinirgatam_). The Five faces of
Śiva as given in the Liṅgārcana Tantra are: “On the West[^2] (i.e., back) is
Sadyojāta; on the North (i.e., left) is Vāma-deva; on the South (right) is
Aghora; and on the East (front) is Tat-puruṣa. Iśāna should be known as being in
the middle. They should thus be meditated upon in a devout spirit.” _Vinirgata_
means uttered (lit., come out)—that is, uttered by these Five Faces.

“By it is attained that good” (_ṣaḍāmnāya-phala-prāptam_).—This literally means:
“by it is obtained the fruit of what has been spoken by the Six Mouths.” The Six
Faces are the five given above and a sixth concealed one which is below, called
Tāmasa. This is alluded to in Ṣaḍvaktra-nyāsa in the Śiva-Tantra thus: “Om Haṃ
Hrīṃ Auṃ Hrīṃ Tāmasāya Svāhā”; as also in the meditation (_dhyāna_) there given,
thus: “The lower face, Nīla-kaṇṭa, is of the colour caused by the deadly poison
Kāla-kūṭa.”[^3]

_Ṣaḍāmnāya_ is what has been spoken by these Faces—that is, all the hymns of
praise to Śiva. By the fruit of this is meant the benefit gained by reciting or
listening to all these mantras, and practising the appropriate _sādhana_. This
is what is gained through this hymn.

“It is attainable by great labour in this wandering” (_prapañce cātidurlabhaṃ_).
By _prapañca_ is meant this _saṃsāra_ (wandering or world), comprising the
Universe from all effects up to Brahmā, and which is shown by Māyā. It is
difficult of attainment (_durlabha_), as it is the result of manifold merit
acquired by the practice of laborious endeavour (_tapas_) in previous births.

End of the Commentary (_Ṭippaṇī_) of the name of Amalā. (Stainless), written by
Śrī-Kalīcāraṇa on the _Pādukāpañcaka-Stotra_.

### Footnotes and references

[^1]: These two accounts appear to agree as to the position of the following in
the order stated—viz., twelve-petalled lotus with A-Ka-Tha triangle in which are
Maṇi-pīṭha, with Bindu above and Nāda below. There remains then to be considered
the position of Haṃsa and the Kāma-kalā which they form. Both are one and the
same, the first being the three Bindu-s, and the second the triangle; they make
(Kāma-kalā), from which emanates (and in this sense forms part of it) the lower
A-Ka-Tha triangle (for this Varṇa-maya). In the second classification, the three
Bindu-s and the triangle (Kāma-kalā) which they form are treated as one, and
placed above the Maṇi-pīṭha. In the first classification, apparently with a view
to gain accordance with the Kaṅkālamālinī-Tantra cited under v.4, the Haṃsa and
the triangle which they form are taken separately, the first being placed below
and the other above Maṇi-pīṭha.

[^2]: The direction one faces is the East.

[^3]: The poison churned out of the ocean and drunk by Śiva. The word means the
secret emissary of death.
