# Verse 4

ऊर्ध्वमस्य हूतभुक्शिखात्रयम् तद्विलासपरिबृंहणास्पदं ।\
विश्वघस्मरमहोच्चिदोत्कटं व्यामृशामि युगमादिहंसयोः ॥ ४ ॥

ūrdhvamasya hūtabhukśikhātrayam tadvilāsaparibṛṃhaṇāspadaṃ |\
viśvaghasmaramahoccidotkaṭaṃ vyāmṛśāmi yugamādihaṃsayoḥ || 4 ||

I intently meditate on the three lines above it (Maṇipīṭha), beginning with the
line of Fire, and on the brilliance of Maṇipītha, which is heightened by the
lustre of those lines. I also meditate on the primordial Haṃsa,[^1] which is the
all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe is absorbed.[^2]

## Commentary by Śrī-Kālīcaraṇa

On Haṃsa-pīṭha, which is within the triangle on Maṇi-pīṭha, between Nāda and
Bindu, is the place of the Guru. He now wishes to describe Haṃsa and the
triangle in order that a clear conception of these two may be gained.

The meaning of this verse is, shortly this: I meditate on the primordial Haṃsa,[^3]
I meditate on the three lines, beginning with the line of Fire, above the place
of Maṇi-pīṭha and also on the glory of the Maṇi-pīṭha itself illumined as it is
by the light of the three lines of Fire and others. The verb “I meditate” occurs
once in this verse, and governs three nouns in the objective case.

“I intently meditate” (_vyāmṛsāmi_). That is, I think with mind undisturbed,
excluding all subjects likely to interfere with my thoughts.

“Above it” (_ūrdhvam asya_)—that is, above Maṇi-pīṭha.

“The three lines beginning with the line of Fire” (*huta-bhuk-śikhātrayaṃ). This
compound word is made up according to the rule known as _śāka-pārthiva_, by
which the word _ādi_, which comes in between two words is dropped. _Adi_ means
“and others”. The Line of Fire,[^4] which is called the Line Vāmā, emanates from
Vahni Bindu in the South, and goes to the North-East Corner; and the Line of
Moon emanates from Candra-Bindu in the North-East Corner, and goes towards the
North-West Corner: this is the line Jyeṣṭhā. The Line of Sun emanates from Sūrya
Bindu in the North-West Corner, and reaches Vahni Bindu: this is the Line
Raudrī. The triangle which is formed by the three lines uniting the three
Bindu-s is Kāma-kalā (_kāma-kalā-rūpaṃ_).

The Bṛhat-Śrī-krama says: “She whose form is letters is coiled up in the Bindu
and comes out thereof as a sprouting seed from the South. From there[^5] She
goes to the Īśāna corner (North-Eeast). She who thus goes is the Śakti Vāmā.
This is Citkalā Parā and the line of Fire. The Śakti which has thus gone to the
Īśāna corner then goes in a straight line (that is, to the North-West). This
line is the line of Jyeṣṭhā. This, O Parameśvarī, is Tripurā, the Sovereign
Mistress. Again turning left[^6] She returns to the place of sprouting. She is
Raudrī, who by Her Union with Icchā and Nāda makes the Śṛṅgāta.”[^7]

The Māheśvarī-saṃhitā says: “Sūrya, Candra and Vahni are the three Bindu-s, and
Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śaṃbhu are the three lines.”

The Prema-yoga-taraṅgiṇī, in describing the Sahasrāra, quotes an authority which
is here cited, clearly showing that the place of the Guru is within this
triangle. “Within it is the excellent lightning-like triangle. Within the
triangle are two imperishable Bindu-s in the form of Visarga. Within it, in the
void, is Śiva, known by the name of Parama.”[^8]

Śaṃkarācārya also has shown this clearly in his Ānandalaharī. The author of the
Lalitā-rahasya also speaks of the Guru as seated on Visarga. Visarga is the two
Bindu-s, Candra and Sūrya, at the upper angles of the (down-turned) triangle.

“On the primordial Haṃsa” (_ādi-haṃsayor-yugam_). Literally interpreted it would
mean the union of[^9] the primordial Haṃ and Saḥ. By Ādi (first) is implied the
Parama-haṃsa, which is also known as Antarātmā, and not the Jīvātmā, which
resembles the flame of a lamp. The Haṃsa here is the combination of Prakṛti and
Puruṣa.

In Āgama-kalpadruma-pañcaśākhā it is said: “Haṃkāra is Bindu, and Visarga is
Saḥ. Bindu is Puruṣa, and Visarga is Prakṛti. Haṃsa is the union of Pum (male)
and Prakṛti (female). The world is pervaded by this Haṃsa.”

Some interpret “_asya ūrdhvaṃ_” to mean “above Maṇi-pīṭha,” and say that the
verse means: “I meditate on the union of the two who constitute the primordial
Haṃsa above Maṇi-pīṭha.” This is wrong. The Kaṅkāla-mālinī speaks of the
Maṇi-pīṭha as above Haṃsa and between Nāda and Bindu. So how can these be below
Haṃsa? This is impossible. This also shows the impossibility of the reading
adopted by some—namely, _huta-bhuk-śikhā-sakham_[^10] in place of
_huta-bhuk-śikhā-trayam_. If this reading were accepted, then the words _ūrdhvaṃ
asya_ (above it) have no meaning. The interpretation “I meditate on the union
of,” as given above, may, however, be understood in the following sense. We have
seen that the Kaṅkāla-mālinī speaks of the Haṃsa as below the Maṇi-pīṭha, which
is between Nāda and Bindu. The interpretation mentioned is in great conflict
with the view of Kaṅkāla-mālinī. But if _huta-bhuk-śikhā-trayam_ be read as
qualifying Haṃsa, then the difficulty may be removed. Then the meaning would be:
“Below Maṇi-pīṭha is Haṃsa, and above it is the triangular Kāma-kalā which is
formed by the Haṃsa.”[^11]

“Which is the all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe is absorbed
(_viśva-ghasmara-mahoccidotkaṭam_). “_Bhakṣ_” and “_ghas_” mean the same thing.
The root “_ghas_” means “to devour,” and the roots “_cid_,” “_hlād_,” and
“_dīp_,” all mean “to shine”. The Great Light (_mahoccit_) which is the Devourer
(_ghasmara_) of the Universe: By that is meant that It is all-powerful
(_utkaṭa_). _Utkaṭa_, which literally means very high, here means very powerful.

### Footnotes and references

[^1]: That is, the Parama-haṃsa which is both Prakṛti and Puruṣa.

[^2]: Lit., “Light which devours the Universe.”

[^3]: i.e., the union of Haṃ and Saḥ whereby the Haṃsa is formed.

[^4]: Here fire is the origin of life, and is therefore associated with Brahmā.
Moon is associated with Viṣṇu. And the Sun spoken of here stands for the twelve
suns (Āditya) which rise to burn the world at dissolution (_pralaya_).

[^5]: _Yasmāt_ is according to the reading given in the original. The same
passage is quoted elsewhere reading _yāmyāt_ (from the south) in place of
_yasmāt_.

[^6]: Reading _vakrībhūtā punar vāme_ for _vyaktībhūya punar vāme_.

[^7]: According to another reading, “By the union of Icchā and Jñāna, Raudrī
makes the Śṛṅgāta.” The passage above quoted shows that the Kāma-kalā is a
subtle form of Kuṇḍalinī, more subtle than the A-Ka-Tha triangle. Cf.
Ānandalaharī, v.21, where the Sūkṣma-dhyāna of Kuṇḍalinī is given.

[^8]: Parama-Śiva.

[^9]: i.e., Haṃ and Saḥ. The union of the two makes Haṃsaḥ. This is the
beginning and end of creation. The outgoing breath (_niśvāsa_) Haṃ of the
Supreme is the duration of the life of Brahmā the Creator (cf. _tavāyur mama
niśvāsaḥ_—Prapañcasāra-Tantra, Ch. I) and Saḥ is the indrawing breath by which
creation returns to Prakṛti.

[^10]: _Huta-bhuk-śikhā-sakha_—the friend of the flame of fire. By this is meant
Vāyu (air). As there is no Vāyu in this region, therefore Vāyu cannot be above
the triangle or above Maṇi-pīṭha.

[^11]: _Tasya parīṇatasya_. Apparently the sense is that the three _bindu_-s, or
Haṃsa are below, but that the triangle which they collectively form, or the
Kāma-kalā, is above, and in this sense the Haṃsa is both above and below
Maṇi-pīṭha.
